What are the things Paul was telling Timothy to be absorbed in and to ponder over?
And in what sense do we today make our advancement clearly seen?
Let's open our Bibles to 1 Timothy chapter 4 and examine the context.
We begin in the last paragraph of this chapter, 1 Timothy chapter 4.
Verse 11 says, keep on giving these commands and teaching them.
Never let anyone look down on your youth.
Instead, become an example to the faithful ones.
In speaking, in conduct, in love, in faith, in chasteness.
Until I come, continue applying yourself to public reading, to exhortation, to teaching,
do not neglect the gift in you that was given you through a prophecy when the body of elders
laid their hands on you, ponder over these things, be absorbed in them so that your advancement
may be plainly seen by all people.
Pay constant attention to yourself and to your teaching, persevere in these things for
by doing this.
You will save both yourself and those who listen to you.
Well, first note that it says, be absorbed, not immersed, absorbed.
What's the difference?
Well, you can drop a whole lung in into a pot of soup.
And if it's not in there very long, you can pull it back out and it's still an onion.
And the soup tastes basically the same.
But what if you were to prepare that onion and then drop it in the soup and leave it there
for hours?
Well, then it absorbs into the soup, to the extent that we simply cannot remove it any longer.
If we are absorbed in something, we become part of it.
The Greek word for be absorbed in literally translates in these things, be you.
Some older translations say, give thyself wholly to.
So what is the soup as it were into which we are to be absorbed?
Well, verse 12 lists speaking, conduct, love, faith and chasteness.
So we ask ourselves, are these qualities and actions what I am?
How is our advancement plainly seen, for instance, in the way we speak?
Now this is not referring to public speaking privileges.
Timothy had been a well-known traveling elder for upwards of ten years before he received
this letter from Paul.
But his advancement would be plainly seen in his loyalty and in the way his speech reflected
his love and his faith.
Now regarding speech, turn with me, please, to James 1.
In this verse, James points out the impact that our speech can have on our worship.
He wrote James 1, 26.
If any man thinks he is a worshiper of God but does not keep a tight reign on his tongue,
he is deceiving his own heart and his worship is futile.
Other older translations say, this man's religion is vain.
This in fact is one of the texts that drew our brothers to the conclusion that there
is a distinction between true religion and false religion.
Never would we want to show the spirit of false religion deceiving ourselves into thinking
that as long as we do some good, God won't care if our words are mean or untrue.
Now we keep a tight reign on our tongue and that expression, keep a tight reign on, reminds
us of James' horse illustration at James 3-3.
Keeping a tight reign on our tongue does not mean that we never speak, any more than keeping
a tight reign on a horse means that you never write it.
No, a horse is valuable, powerful, beautiful, and it can be very useful when trained.
So we use our gift of speech, but we control what we say so that it has the effect we want,
the effect Jehovah wants.
Our speech can reveal the degree to which we have made spiritual progress.
Now today most don't serve in congregations like Ephesus where Paul asked him to keep
working as a bulwark against false stories and misleading inspired statements and teachings
of demons, but we can set a powerful example in the way we speak.
We work with people here in Bethel and in our congregations.
The 133rd Psalm says that Jehovah's blessing is where brothers dwell together in unity.
First Peter 4-14 says that Jehovah's Spirit is resting upon the congregation.
So there's a blessing when we work together.
No one human has every quality needed to see a project through to its completion.
And when we come together, we speak.
We talk about how to get the job done.
At times we consider is this a good plan of action?
Is our work being done well?
Is it effective?
Is it being carried out in harmony with published guidelines?
Is it genuinely helpful?
In that process of people who have poured hours of work into a project could find that
their feelings are keenly attuned to those answers to those questions.
But what happens if someone takes exception to the way we have done our job?
What if they point out a problem, but their solution is worse than the problem itself?
Will we stop listening to them or stop respecting them?
Could we be grateful for their perspective that something's not quite right while at the
same time continuing to seek a solution?
What words will we use?
This could be a very good opportunity for us to become an example to the faithful ones
in speaking.
Have you ever noticed that some people consistently show gratitude and are rich with words of
commendation, even when they're offering correction?
And it's not just a technical formula, the counsel, sandwich, commendation, counsel,
commendation.
No, it's valid.
Words that took real observation and appreciation.
Starting from a person who, on other occasions, only shows encouragement or you know those
elders who can enter into the most stressful situation and just get everybody laughing
and then offer frank counsel if needed, but then keep everybody in a good mood.
It's an art.
Never make the mistake of thinking he's just a natural.
No, that is advancement.
So many in our Bethel family have this skill.
We appreciate them.
Become an example to the faithful ones in speaking.
But Paul also mentions conduct and chasteness, how good it is to be surrounded by examples
of those who truly delight in maintaining Jehovah's High moral standards.
And first Timothy 412 also mentions becoming an example in love.
If Timothy had been harsh or unkind in the way he dealt with his fellow believers, what
effect could that have had on all the good work he had accomplished already as a teacher
and an overseer?
And we also said an example for the faithful ones in faith.
Our faith can be seen in our ability to discern Jehovah's hand and the way he's backing
and blessing the work that we are doing.
Can we build Ramapo under lockdown?
How can we make videos when we can't get 20 people together in a small space?
How do we make disciples if we have to stay six feet away from everyone?
But what have we seen?
Ramapo is ahead of schedule.
JW Broadcasting is more useful than ever.
A congregation meetings are better attended than before and thousands of new disciples
are still being baptized every week.
Why?
Because all things are possible with God if one has faith.
Become an example to the faithful ones in speaking, in conduct, in love, in faith,
in chasteness.
That's the soup.
Answer over these things.
Be absorbed in them and in that way your advancement will be plainly seen.